
 SCOTTISH  FOLD


GENERAL  TYPE   STANDARD

The Scottish Fold cat occurred as a spontaneous mutation in Scotland. Overall, it is a well-rounded cat of medium bone, with small, folded ears, giving the breed its distinctive appearance. Males can be expected to be larger than females.


HEAD - well-rounded with prominent cheeks, has well-defined whisker pads and is well set on a short neck. Allowance should be made for jowls in adult males. In profile, the head is rounded, balanced front and back, with a slight nose stop and good depth of chin.

EARS - small, folded forwards and downwards. A very small, tightly folded ear is preferred to a loose fold and a large ear.  The ears must be set well apart, in a cap-like fashion, forming part of the rounded contour of the head. The tips are rounded.

EYES - large, well-rounded, well-opened, with the width of an eye between the eyes, creating a sweet expression.

NOSE - short and broad. In profile, it has a gentle curve. A slight stop is permitted, but a definite nose break is a fault.

CHEEKS - prominent and rounded, with well-defined  whisker pads.

JAWS - rounded, not pointed, pinched or square.

CHIN - firm. In profile, of good depth and in a vertical line with the tip of the nose.

NECK - short.

BODY - medium, rounded and well-padded with no hint of coarseness. It has a level back, good depth of chest and is equal in girth from shoulder to rump.

LEGS - strongly-boned and of medium length. There should be no appearance of stiffness or lack of mobility due to distortion or rigidity in the leg bones.

PAWS - neat and well-rounded.

TAIL - medium to long, in proportion to the body, reasonably broad at the base, flexible and tapering. A longer tapering tail is preferred.



SCALE  OF  POINTS

				Head		15
				Ears		25
				Eyes		  5	45

				Body		15
				Tail		20
				Legs and paws   5	40	

				Coat		10
				Condition	  5	15

				Total			100


FAULTS

REFER TO GENERAL LIST COVERING ALL BREEDS, PLUS:

FAULTS	- Large or high-set ears.
		- Small or close-set eyes.
		- Definite nose break or defined stop.
		- Uneven bite or weak chin.
		- Muzzle pinch.
		- Splayed toes.
		- Fine boning or lack of size.

WITHHOLD AWARDS  	
		- Coarseness, distortion or abnormality of the leg bones.
		- Foreshortened, thick, inflexible or kinked tail.
		- Incorrect or insufficient fold in ears.

COAT   AND   COLOUR

COAT  COLOUR  - can be in all recognized colours and patterns.

COAT LENGTH AND TEXTURE  - medium short, dense, soft and resilient, without the bounce of the British Shorthair coat. Texture may vary due to colour and/or regional or seasonal variation.

EYE RIMS AND NOSE LEATHER  - to harmonise with coat colour.

PAW PADS  - to harmonise with coat colour.

EYE COLOUR  - to harmonise with coat colour.1

1

CCCA  Group  3  standard  -  SCOTTISH  FOLD  (SHORTHAIR)      4/6/2001