


By Post and Fax (5555 5555)


xxxxxxx x.x. xxxx & xx.
xxxx x, 55/x. xxxxxxxxx xxxxx59-55 xxxxx block5
xxxxx xxxxx
xxxx xxxx

Attention: xx xxxxxxx xxxa/xxxx xxxxxx xxxxx


xxxx xx blca/k5xxxx,

RE:	xxxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx

Many thanks for xxxxxx’x block2xxxx to xxxxxxx a xxxxxxx with you in your office this morning.

We xxxxxxx xxx xxxx for xxxxxxxxx of the xxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx or xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx to xxxxxxxxxxx are xxxxxx xx xxx xxxxx xxxx xxx xxxxxx xxx xxxx xxxx thereafter. These xxxx xxxxxxx the xxxxxxxxxx xxxx.  For xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx to xxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx will be a xxxxxx xx xxxxx.xx xx a xxxxxxx xxxxxxx is required and xxxxx.xx xxx xxxxxxxxx.  

We now have available xxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx with xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxx of xxxxxxxxxxx.  The xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxx xxx xxxx xxxxx with the xxxxxxxxx together with the xxxxxxx xxxxxxx.  Both xxxxxxxx xxxx the xxxxxxxxx’x xxxx.  The xxxxxxx xxxxxxx of xxxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxx also xxxxxxxx the xxxxxxx xxxx in xxxxxxx.  These xxxxxxxxx are available at our xxxxx xxxxx xxxx an xxxxx xxxxx.xx in the xxxxx xxxx (ie. xxx xxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxxx an xxxxx xxxxx.xx).  xxxxx xxxxxs of xxxxxx xxxxx for xxxxxx xxxxxxxx.

We have our own xxxxxxxxx and xxxxx in xxx xxxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxxx. We can xxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx to xxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxx xx xxxxx of xxxxxxxxxxxx being given.  x xxxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxxxxxxxxx is sent by fax as soon as xxxxxxxx xx the xxxxxxxxx xxxxx is usually xxx xxxx after xxxxxxxblock1.  Original documents follow in the next xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxx and usually arrive somewhere xxxxxxx xxx to xxx xxxxx after xxxxxxxxxxxx are given.  

We also maintain about xxxx than 555 xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xx our xxxx xxxx xxxxxx which are available for xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx.  x xxxx xx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx will be faxed to you xxxxx xxxxx and on request.  Our list xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx for xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxx xx xx xxxx xxxx as well as xxxxxxxxx with the xxxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx the xxxxxxx xxxx xx xxxxxxx and xxxxx with the xxxxxxxxx.


										2/.....





xx xxxx and xxx (5555 5555)


xxxxxxx x.x. xxxx & xx.

Attention: xx xxxxxxx xxxa/xxxx block2 xxxxx

Page 2




For xxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx to instructions we will, at no xxxxx xxxxxx, xxxxxxx the xxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx for the xxxxxxxxxx of the xxxxxxx.  This xxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx the xxxxxxxxxx'x xxxxxxxxxxx of xxxxx xxxxxxxxx, xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxx including xxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxx, xxxxxxxxxxxx xxx xxxxxx, xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx, xxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxxxx or xxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx.  xxxxxxxxxxxxx these xxxxxxx can be left blank and xxxxxxxxx xx xxx xx xxxx block3x.

Our xxxxxxx xxxx always include a copy of the xxxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxx of xxxxxxxxxxn in xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx.

You will see xxxx our xxx xxxxxxxx that we are also xxxx to provide xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx and xxxxxxxxxxxx where xxxxxxxx.  If xxxxxxxxx block4xx are xxxx we have xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx in xxx xxxxxx in xxxx xxxx, xxx xxxx xxxxxxx xxx xxx xxxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxxx who are able to xxxx xx xxxxxx xx xxxxx xxxxxxxx if this is required.

Please contact xxxxxxxx xxxx, xxxxx xxxxx xx xxxxxx xxxx if you require any further information.

Regards,

Yours faithfully,
For and on xxxxxx xx
xxxxxxxx (xxxx xxxx) xblock2





xblock4x xxxx

encl.


