What are Irish people entitled to expect from their statistical system and are they really getting it?


The views expressed below are intended to portray certain facets of the Irish statistical system and some possible consequences for public administration and the service received by Irish citizens. While the author is an employee of the Central Statistics Office (CSO), the views and perceptions expressed are very much his own and do not purport to reflect official CSO views.


In recent years the CSO has become far more outward looking than previously. To a large extent, this has been as result of the deliberations of the National Statistics Board (NSB), of which the Director General of the CSO is an ex-officio member. There has also been increasing interaction and engagement between the NSB and employees of the CSO.

The NSB has existed since 1986 and, since the introduction in 1993 of the Statistics Act, has existed on a statutory basis. The role of the NSB can be described as that of setting a strategic direction for official statistics. Until recently, this was interpreted narrowly to mean guiding the strategic direction of the CSO. However, in its most recent strategy statement (Strategy for Statistics, 2003-2008), the NSB has highlighted the need to move to a “whole-system” approach to statistics. Given the increasing number of ways that individuals and businesses interact with the State, it has become obvious that a huge amount of valuable (or more correctly, potentially valuable) data are being held by disparate state agencies and government departments. It has also become obvious that many of these data sources are planned with limited and self-contained administrative uses in mind. While this could be seen (arguably) as a good outcome from a data protection viewpoint, it is highly unlikely that it is a desirable outcome from a service or value for money perspective. Included in this notion of service are items such as evidence-based policy formulation and policy evaluation. Also included is the quality of direct interactions between businesses and individuals and those acting for or on behalf of the state. 

On foot of NSB deliberations, the CSO has been engaging directly and deeply with most Government departments over the last 3 or 4 years. For each department, a detailed description of data needs and data sources and the degree to which they dovetail was prepared. This work was carried out both for data on businesses and on persons. Another focus of this work was to assess the statistical potential of existing sources for wider policy and reporting purposes. The results of this analysis show, perhaps unsurprisingly, that data sources can be fairly uncoordinated even within organisations. Furthermore, even the very existence of data sources is often not well known within an organisation. Also, concepts like value added as relating to data sources are not well developed in the government sector. Similar, yet different, classifications are often used for related data sources, making links at a macro level difficult to a degree that such activities are not even attempted. This indicates low awareness of the value of data. Perhaps this has something to do with the public sector’s attitude towards the recruitment of, development of, or appreciation of an effective analysis capacity.

A recurring theme in the CSO interaction with other organisations has been the degree to which data, data processes and access to data are under the control of IT departments. Activities are too readily labelled as “IT projects”. This aspect of organisational culture, which is not unique to Ireland, has contributed to a lack of ownership of processes in business areas and a consequently low appreciation of the value of data. It probably has also led to a situation whereby only “perfect” IT solutions are considered. Sometimes this search for “perfection” can be a justification for lack of action. Also, IT developers are often forced to act as data custodians rather than as support to those in functional areas who would otherwise be the real owners or custodians of the data.

Another recurring theme concerns the expression of data needs. Needs are often expressed vaguely, while on other occasions they are expressed in a certain and precise manner which does not always seem contextually appropriate. Because of the disconnection in the system, the latter case often results in “special” or “once-off” expensive surveys being commissioned to meet a particular perceived need. Often, the data collected in those publicly funded surveys never come into public ownership. The very existence of these sources is rarely publicised. Many such needs could be met from a well planned, regularly updated, efficient (from a respondent and data utility perspective), flexible and well publicised public program of data collection. A notion which is often cited is that local functional units can specify needs in a contextually aware way, while those needs can then be precisely and efficiently met by another agency or functional area. This idealistic notion is not the reality as experienced by the author.

Given its relatively small size, Ireland cannot afford to be haphazard in its approach to data. Statistical surveys are expensive and populations (of individuals and businesses) are relatively small. Given Ireland’s domestic statistical needs and international obligations, even more foresight needs to be given to planning the statistical system and to using it efficiently than is the case in larger countries. This will entail making much more use of administrative data than is currently the case. In turn, this must involve the mainstreaming of statistical use in the design of administrative sources.  It can no longer be deemed appropriate for individual units in departments and agencies to plan their own sources without glancing in the direction of other potential users or in the direction of the CSO. Systems and structures urgently need to be put in place to support this “whole-system” approach to providing data of sufficient quality to support the key functions of policy formulation, policy evaluation and outcome-focused public reporting.

Because of the combination of lack of co-ordination across the administrative system, small population sizes and the laws of statistics with respect to sample sizes, response (or compliance) burden is a significant issue. While, historically, an increase in average response burden and “red-tape” in general was seen as an issue that affected businesses, it is now also of increasing concern to private citizens. Demands on the statistical system are increasing rather than reducing and are becoming increasingly sophisticated and often specialised. This brings even more sharply into focus the need to develop good, robust, responsive and efficient solutions which serve the country’s and the citizens’ interests. The components of these interests include efficiency, data utility, competent approaches to data analysis as well as keeping response burden to a reasonable minimum.

The main focus of CSO’s collaborative work with other organisations has been on social and business/economic information and there is increasing awareness of the degree to which those social and economic interests are interdependent. This is evidenced by the nature of partnership agreements in Ireland in recent years. Such an approach seems also to be the way forward in the world of data and information. All stakeholders must be represented and have a real say in the “why and how” of information that is being collected from them, for them or by them. As the NSB has postulated in its current strategy, a highly centralised solution is unlikely to succeed. Some ideas are presented as to how such an efficient and effective collaborative approach can be achieved. 

 The development of holistic and integrative approaches to the collection and use of “public good” data in Ireland is not without its challenges. Data that can be used for both statistical and administrative purposes pose one type of challenge.  Catering for the real and valid “big brother” concerns of citizens is another. Occurrences of defensiveness, inertia and resistance to change in the Irish Public Sector pose yet another. However, it is argued that these challenges must no longer be seen as reasons for inaction. None of the challenges is insurmountable, as long as the solutions are presented in a transparent manner.

Examples, which highlight disconnection in the statistical/information system in Ireland, are presented. These examples are taken from the functional areas of health, education, crime and security as well as business and economic statistics. 

Some interesting recent developments are also presented which may be a source of hope that the system may be readying itself for fundamental change. However, it will be argued that is too early to say whether such an optimistic view is well founded.

A vision of the characteristics of the CSO of the future is also presented. The view given will be that of an enabling, facilitative, professional and highly competent organisation that is willing to publicly defend, openly and transparently, the reasoning, methods and methodologies relied on by it on behalf of the Irish public. Evidence will be presented to illustrate how the process of incorporating this vision in the collective CSO psyche is already at an advanced stage. Also, the view that the CSO must continue to see itself in the role of awareness-raiser is strongly supported.

Any implicit criticism of the system or of the public servants who operate this system should not be taken too much to heart. The view is that any disconnection in the Irish statistical system has been brought about by many causes. Identification of all of those causes, even if it were possible, is unlikely to shed any light on the identification of solutions. In any event, the author sees himself as part of the disconnected system and therefore any implicit criticism is as much self-directed as directed at others. The author is also of the view that there is huge potential for innovative and effective change in the Irish public sector’s attitude to and use of data. The view is also given that these changes, which would be so beneficial to Irish people, can be brought about first and foremost by raising awareness of the possibilities. Once the possibilities are appreciated, energetic and imaginative people throughout the public sector will work together to bring about a more positive and supportive environment for citizens and public servants alike.

The argument is made that the statistical system is still in need of fundamental development in order to serve the interests of the Irish public – both its current citizens and its future ones. In a global environment which is increasingly competitive and one in which social well-being and economic well-being are so interdependent, the argument is put that Ireland can ill afford not to accelerate in this direction.
